Updates for Provider Families (#150)
upbound/docs: content/knowledge-base/migrate-to-provider-families.md

---
title: Migrate to Provider Families
---

The Upbound official [provider families]({{<ref "upbound-marketplace/providers#provider-families">}}) organize provider services into common, logical, groupings. 
Provider families replace the original monolithic providers, which combined all provider services into a single Provider object.

Migrating from a monolithic provider to a family provider allows the family provider to take ownership of existing managed resources. 

{{<hint "important" >}}
Upbound only supports migration from Upbound's official monolithic providers. 

> Migration from Crossplane community providers to Upbound provider families isn't supported.

Author: You mean in the future we'll provide support for customers migrating from community? 

Is this "engineering supported" for bug fixes or "services supported"?

kubectl get claim --all-namespaces -o yaml > backup-claims.yaml
```

## Update the resource deletion policy

Update the deletion policy on all managed resources to `Orphan` to prevent Crossplane from deleting the resources. 

{{<hint "note" >}}
This may take over 10 minutes depending on the number of managed resources in the cluster. 
{{< /hint >}}

```shell
kubectl patch $(kubectl get managed -o name) -p '{"spec":{"deletionPolicy":"Orphan"}}' --type=merge
```

## Create a list of family provider services

Upbound maintains a migration script that maps all existing managed resources to their family provider service.
This script generates a list of new family providers to install. 

1. Download the script
```bash
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/upbound/upjet/main/docs/sp-migration/generate-manifests.sh
chmod +x generate-manifests.sh
```

2. Run the script to generate a list of provider family services. The script produces two files, `sp-family-manual.yaml` for the new provider families provider 
and `sp-manual.yaml` for individual services. 

{{<hint "note" >}}
The script relies on `kubectl` to connect to your Kubernetes cluster.
{{< /hint >}}

```shell {copy-lines="1"}

> ./generate-manifests.sh

Author: This worked in my environment without setting this and I don't see $KUBECONFIG referenced anywhere inside the script, so I excluded it.

Generating manifests from current cluster
```

The files set the `revisionActivationPolicy` on each provider to `Manual` to prevent the providers from competing over the resources.

> ## Install the new family provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install the family's config provider package
```

Apply the `sp-family-manual.yaml` generated by the script to your cluster.

```shell
kubectl apply -f sp-family-manual.yaml
```

Verify the `upbound-provider-family-` provider is `INSTALLED: False` and `HEALTHY: True`.

```shell {copy-lines="1"}
kubectl get providers
NAME                          INSTALLED   HEALTHY   PACKAGE                                               AGE
upbound-provider-aws          True        True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws:v0.27.0          26m
upbound-provider-family-aws   False       True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-family-aws:v0.37.0   6m56s
```

{{<hint "note" >}}
Family providers use a single `provider-family-` Provider to manage ProviderConfig objects across all service providers in the same family. 
{{< /hint >}}

> ## Install the family service providers

Author: Renaming the two "install" headings to "config provider" and "resource providers"

> Use the `sp-manual.yaml` file to install the providers for each service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `sp-manual.yaml` file to install the family providers needed.
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f sp-manual.yaml
```

> Verify the service providers are `INSTALLED: False` and `HEALTHY: True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the family providers are `INSTALLED: False` and `HEALTHY: True`.
```

{{<hint "note" >}}
This example only uses a single service, {{<hover label="s3" line="4">}}s3{{</hover>}}.
{{< /hint >}}

```shell {copy-lines="1",label="s3"}
kubectl get providers
NAME                          INSTALLED   HEALTHY   PACKAGE                                                AGE
upbound-provider-aws          True        True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws:v0.27.0           30m

> upbound-provider-aws-s3       False       True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound-/provider-aws-s3:v0.37.0       5s
> upbound-provider-family-aws   False       True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound-/provider-family-aws:v0.37.0   10m

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upbound-provider-aws-s3       False       True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-s3:v0.37.0       5s
upbound-provider-family-aws   False       True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-family-aws:v0.37.0   10m
```

      - constraints: '>=v0.31.0'
        package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-gcp
        type: Provider
    name: ezgid-test-smaller-provider-migration-3a0d5472dd78
    source: index.docker.io/ezgid/test-smaller-provider-migration
    type: Configuration
    version: v0.4.0
  - dependencies: []
    name: upbound-provider-gcp-a206c0fc297b
    source: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-gcp
    type: Provider
    version: v0.32.0
```
{{< /expand >}}

{{<expand "An example Lock after editing" >}}
```yaml
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1beta1
kind: Lock
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-05-16T14:37:01Z"
  finalizers:
    - lock.pkg.crossplane.io
  generation: 99
  name: lock
  resourceVersion: "1969272"
  uid: aa60ed13-ec55-4047-b409-b96beb9fe286
packages:
  - dependencies: []
    name: upbound-provider-gcp-a206c0fc297b
    source: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-gcp
    type: Provider
    version: v0.32.0
```
{{< /expand >}}

## Delete the original monolithic provider

Now delete the original monolithic Provider.

{{< editCode >}}
```console
kubectl delete provider.pkg $@<PROVIDER_NAME>$@
```
{{< /editCode >}}

## Edit the family provider revision activation policy

> Change the family provider's `revisionActivationPolicy` from `Manual` to `Automatic`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change the family config provider's `revisionActivationPolicy` from `Manual` to `Automatic`.
```

```shell
sed 's/revisionActivationPolicy: Manual/revisionActivationPolicy: Automatic/' sp-family-manual.yaml > sp-family-automatic.yaml
```

> Apply the updated family provider manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the updated family config provider manifest.
```

kubectl get composite -o yaml > backup-composites.yaml
kubectl get claim --all-namespaces -o yaml > backup-claims.yaml
```

## Update the resource deletion policy

Update the deletion policy on all managed resources to `Orphan` to prevent
Crossplane from deleting the resources. 

Find any resources that are already set to `Orphan`.

```shell
kubectl get $(kubectl get managed -o name) -o json | jq '.items[] | select(.spec.deletionPolicy=="Orphan") | "\(.spec.forProvider.tags."crossplane-kind")/\(.spec.forProvider.tags."crossplane-name")"'
```

Save the names of any returned resources. 

Next, set the deletion policy of all managed resources to `Orphan`.

```shell
kubectl patch $(kubectl get managed -o name) -p '{"spec":{"deletionPolicy":"Orphan"}}' --type=merge
```

{{<hint "note" >}}
These commands may take over 10 minutes depending on the number of managed resources in the cluster. 
{{< /hint >}}

## Create a list of family provider services

Upbound maintains a migration script that maps all existing managed resources to their family provider packages.
This script generates a list of new family providers to install. 

1. Download the script
```bash

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/upbound/upjet/main/docs/sp-migration/generate-manifests.sh

Reviewer 2: Could you please change this link with the following one? (As described, we are moving the docs from upjet to the new migration repo) https://github.com/upbound/extensions-migration/blob/main/docs/generate-manifests.sh

Author: updated, thanks!
